# Introduction
DNSSEC can be somewhat of a complicated matter, and there are certain areas
of the specification that are more difficult to comprehend than others.
One such area is "authenticated denial of existence".

Denial of existence is a mechanism that informs a resolver
that a certain domain name does not exist. It is also used
to signal that a domain name exists, but does not have the specific
RR type you were asking for.

The first is referred to as an NXDOMAIN (non-existent domain)
([](#RFC2308) Section 2.1)
and the latter a NODATA ([](#RFC2308) Section 2.2) response.  Both are also
known as negative responses.

Authenticated denial of existence uses cryptography to sign the
negative response. However, if there is no answer, what is it that
needs to be signed? To further complicate this matter, there is the
desire to pre-generate negative responses that are applicable for
all queries for non-existent names in the signed zone. See
[](#secure-denial-of-existence) for the details.

In this document, we will explain how authenticated denial
of existence works.
We begin by explaining the current technique in the DNS
and work our way up to DNSSEC. We explain the first steps
taken in DNSSEC and describe how NSEC and NSEC3 work. The NXT, NO, NSEC2 and
DNSNR records also briefly make their appearance, as they have paved the
way for NSEC and NSEC3.

To complete the picture, we also need to explain DNS wildcards
as these complicate matters, especially combined with CNAME records.

Note: In this document, domain names in zone file examples will have a trailing dot, in the
running text they will not.
This text is written for people who have a fair understanding
of DNSSEC.
The following RFCs are not required reading, but they help in
understanding the problem space.

* RFC 5155 [](#RFC5155) - Hashed Authenticated Denial of Existence;
* RFC 4592 [](#RFC4592) - The Role of Wildcards in the DNS.

And these provide some general DNSSEC information.

* RFC 4033, RFC 4034, RFC 4035 [](#RFC4033), [](#RFC4034), [](#RFC4035) - DNSSEC Specification;
* RFC 4956 [](#RFC4956) - DNS Security (DNSSEC) Opt-In. This RFC has experimental
    status, but is a good read.

These three drafts give some background information on the NSEC3
development.

* The NO record [](#I-D.ietf-dnsext-not-existing-rr);
* The NSEC2 record [](#I-D.laurie-dnsext-nsec2v2);
* The DNSNR record [](#I-D.arends-dnsnr).

# Denial of Existence
We start with the basics and take a look at
NXDOMAIN handling in the DNS. To make it more visible
we are going to use a small DNS zone, with
3 names (`example.org`, `a.example.org` and `d.example.org`) and 3 types (SOA,
A and TXT). For brevity, the class is not shown (defaults to IN) and
the SOA record is shortened, resulting in the following zone file:

    example.org.        SOA ( ... )
    example.org.        NS  a.example.org.
    a.example.org.      A 192.0.2.1
                        TXT "a record"
    d.example.org.      A 192.0.2.1
                        TXT "d record"
^[fig:the-unsigned::The unsigned "example.org" zone.]

## NXDOMAIN Responses
If a resolver asks for the TXT type belonging to `a.example.org` to the
name server serving this zone, it sends the following question: `a.example.org TXT`

The name server looks in its zone data and
generates an answer. In this case a positive one: "Yes it exists
and this is the data", resulting in this reply:

    ;; status: NOERROR, id: 28203

    ;; ANSWER SECTION:
    a.example.org.      TXT "a record"

    ;; AUTHORITY SECTION:
    example.org.        NS a.example.org.


The `status: NOERROR` signals that everything is OK, `id` is an integer
used to match questions and answers. In the ANSWER section, we find
our answer. The AUTHORITY section holds the names of the name servers
that have information concerning the `example.org` zone. Note that including
this information is optional.

If a resolver asks for `b.example.org TXT` it gets an answer that
this name does not exist:

    ;; status: NXDOMAIN, id: 7042

    ;; AUTHORITY SECTION:
    example.org.        SOA ( ... )

In this case, we do not get an ANSWER section and the status
is set to NXDOMAIN. From this the resolver concludes that `b.example.org` does not
exist. The AUTHORITY section holds the SOA record of `example.org` that the
resolver can use to cache the negative response.

## NODATA Responses
It is important to realize that NXDOMAIN is not the only type
of does-not-exist. A name may exist, but the type you are asking
for may not. This occurrence of non-existence is called a NODATA response.
Let us ask our name server for `a.example.org AAAA`, and look at the
answer:

    ;; status: NOERROR, id: 7944

    ;; AUTHORITY SECTION:
    example.org.        SOA ( ... )

The status NOERROR shows that the `a.example.org` name exists,
but the reply does not contain an ANSWER section. This differentiates a
NODATA response from an NXDOMAIN response, the rest of the packet is
very similar. The resolver
has to put these pieces of information together and conclude that
`a.example.org` exists, but it does not have an `AAAA` record.

# Secure Denial of Existence
The above has to be translated to the security aware world
of DNSSEC. But there are a few principles DNSSEC brings to the table:

1. A name server is free to compute the answer and signature(s)
    on-the-fly, but the protocol is written with a "first sign, then load" 
    attitude in mind.
    It is rather asymmetrical, but a lot of the design in DNSSEC
    stems from fact that you need to accommodate authenticated
    denial of existence. If the DNS did not have NXDOMAIN, DNSSEC would be a
    lot simpler, but a lot less useful!

2. The DNS packet header is not signed. 
    This means that a `status: NXDOMAIN` 
    can not be trusted. In fact the entire header may be forged, including
    the AD bit (AD stands for Authentic Data, see RFC 3655 [](#RFC3655)), 
    which may give some food for thought;

3. DNS wildcards and CNAME records complicate matters significantly. More
    about this in later sections ([](#wildcards-in-the-dns) and [](#cname-records)).

The first principle implies that all denial of existence answers need to be 
pre-computed, but it is impossible to pre-compute (all conceivable) non-existence answers.

A generic denial record which can be used in all denial of existence proofs is
not an option: such a record is susceptible to replay attacks. When you are
querying a name server for any record that actually exists, a
man-in-the-middle could replay that generic denial record that is not limited
in its scope and it would be impossible to tell whether the response was
genuine or spoofed. In other words, the generic record can be replayed to 
falsely deny *all* possible responses. 
 
Another way would be to use the QNAME in the answer and sign that; essentially
signing an NXDOMAIN response. While this approach technically works, it does
not provide a solution for NODATA responses, and it is also incompatible
with offline signing. [](#dnssec-on-line-signing) describes good on-line
signing methods, the techniques described here work with records that can be
created in advance.

The way this has been solved is by introducing a record that defines an
interval between two existing names. Or to put it another way: it
defines the holes (non-existing names) in the zone. This record can 
be signed beforehand and given to the resolver.

> Given all these troubles, why didn't the designers of
> DNSSEC go for the (easy) route and allowed for online signing? Well,
> at that time (pre 2000), online signing was not feasible with the then
> current hardware. Keep in mind that the larger servers get
> between 2000 and 6000 queries per second (qps), with peaks up to 20,000 qps
> or more.  Scaling signature generation to these kind of levels is
> always a challenge. Another issue was (and is) key management, for online
> signing to work you need access to the private key(s). This is considered a
> security risk. 

The road to the current solution (NSEC/NSEC3) was long. It
started with the NXT (next) record. The NO (not existing) record was introduced,
but never made it to RFC. Later on, NXT was superseded by the
NSEC (next secure) record. From there it went through NSEC2/DNSNR to finally reach
NSEC3 (next secure, version 3) in RFC 5155.

## NXT
The first attempt to specify authenticated denial of existence was NXT 
(RFC 2535 [](#RFC2535)).  Section 5.1 of that RFC introduces the record:

> "The NXT resource record is used to securely indicate that RRs with an
> owner name in a certain name interval do not exist in a zone and to
> indicate what RR types are present for an existing name."

By specifying what you do have, you implicitly tell what you don't have. NXT
is superseded by NSEC. In the next section we explain how NSEC (and thus NXT) works.

## NSEC
In RFC 3755 [](#RFC3755) all the DNSSEC types were given new names, SIG was renamed RRSIG,
KEY became DNSKEY and NXT was renamed to NSEC and a minor 
issue was fixed in the process, namely the type bitmap was redefined to allow more
than 127 types to be listed ([](#RFC2535), Section 5.2).

Just as NXT, NSEC is used to describe an interval
between names: it indirectly tells a resolver which names do not exist in
a zone.

For this to work, we need our `example.org` zone to be sorted in canonical order
([](#RFC4034), Section 6.1), and then create the NSECs.
We add three NSEC records, one for each name, and each one covers a certain
interval. The last NSEC record points back to the first as required by the RFC, and
depicted in [](#fig:the-nsec-r).

1. The first NSEC covers the interval between `example.org` and
   `a.example.org`;
2. The second NSEC covers `a.example.org` to `d.example.org`;
3. The third NSEC points back to `example.org`, and covers `d.example.org` to
   `example.org` (i.e. the end of the zone).

As we have defined the intervals and put those in resource
records, we now have something that can be signed.

                        example.org
                           **
                       +-- ** <--+
                  (1) /  .    .   \ (3)
                     /  .      .   \
                    |  .        .  |
                    v .          . |
                    **    (2)     **
      a.example.org ** ---------> ** d.example.org
^[fig:the-nsec-r::The NSEC records of "example.org". The arrows represent NSEC records, starting from the apex.]

This signed zone is loaded into the name server. It looks like this:

    example.org.        SOA ( ... )
                        DNSKEY ( ... )
                        NS  a.example.org.
                        NSEC a.example.org. NS SOA RRSIG NSEC DNSKEY
                        RRSIG(NS) ( ... )
                        RRSIG(SOA) ( ... )
                        RRSIG(NSEC) ( ... )
                        RRSIG(DNSKEY) ( ... )
    a.example.org.      A 192.0.2.1
                        TXT "a record"
                        NSEC d.example.org. A TXT RRSIG NSEC
                        RRSIG(A) ( ... )
                        RRSIG(TXT) ( ... )
                        RRSIG(NSEC) ( ... )
    d.example.org.      A 192.0.2.1
                        TXT "d record"
                        NSEC example.org. A TXT RRSIG NSEC
                        RRSIG(A) ( ... )
                        RRSIG(TXT) ( ... )
                        RRSIG(NSEC) ( ... )
^[fig:the-signed::The signed and sorted "example.org" zone with the added NSEC records (and signatures).
For brevity, the class is not shown (defaults to IN) and
the SOA, DNSKEY and RRSIG records are shortened.]

If a DNSSEC aware resolver asks for `b.example.org`, it gets
back a `status: NXDOMAIN` packet, which by itself is meaningless (remember
that the DNS packet header is not signed and thus can be forged).
To be able to securely detect that `b` does not exist,
there must also be a signed NSEC record which covers the name space
where `b` lives. The record:

    a.example.org.      NSEC d.example.org. A TXT RRSIG NSEC

does precisely that: `b`
should come after `a`, but the next owner name is `d.example.org`, so
`b` does not exist.

Only by making that calculation, is a resolver able to conclude that the name
`b` does not exist. If the signature of the NSEC record is valid, `b`
is proven not to exist. We have authenticated denial of existence.

Note that a man-in-the-middle may still replay this NXDOMAIN response
when you're querying for, say, `c.example.org`. But it would not do any
harm since it is provably the proper response to the query. In the future, there
may be data published for `c.example.org`. Therefore, the RRSIG's RDATA 
include a validity period (not visible in the zone above), so that an attacker
cannot replay this NXDOMAIN response for `c.example.org` forever.

## NODATA Responses
NSEC records are also used in NODATA responses. In that case we need to look more closely 
at the type bitmap. The
type bitmap in an NSEC record tells which types are defined for
a name. If we look at the NSEC record of `a.example.org`, we
see the following types in the bitmap: A, TXT, NSEC and RRSIG. So
for the name `a` this indicates we must have an A, TXT, NSEC and RRSIG record in the
zone. 

With the type bitmap of the NSEC record, a resolver can establish
that a name is there, but the type is not. For example, if a resolver
asks for `a.example.org AAAA`, the reply that comes
back is:

    ;; status: NOERROR, id: 44638

    ;; AUTHORITY SECTION:
    example.org.        SOA ( ... )
    example.org.        RRSIG(SOA) ( ... )
    a.example.org.      NSEC d.example.org. A TXT RRSIG NSEC
    a.example.org.      RRSIG(NSEC) ( ... )

The resolver should check the AUTHORITY section and conclude that: 

II.  `a.example.org` exists (because of the NSEC with that owner name) and;
II.  the type (AAAA) does not as it is not listed in the type bitmap.

The techniques used by NSEC form the basics of authenticated denial of
existence in DNSSEC.

## Drawbacks of NSEC
There were two issues with NSEC (and NXT).
The first is that it allows for zone walking. NSEC
records point from one name to another, in our example: `example.org`, points
to `a.example.org` which points to `d.example.org` which points back to
`example.org`. So we can reconstruct the entire `example.org` zone,
thus defeating attempts to administratively block zone transfers ([](#RFC2065) Section 5.5).

The second issue is that when a large, delegation-centric ([](#RFC5155), Section 1.1),
zone deploys DNSSEC, every name in the zone gets an NSEC plus
RRSIG. So this leads to a huge increase in the zone
size (when signed). This would in turn mean that operators of such zones
who are deploying DNSSEC, face up front costs. This could hinder DNSSEC adoption.

These two issues eventually lead to NSEC3 which:

* Adds a way to garble the owner names, thus thwarting zone-walking;
* Makes it possible to skip names for the next owner name. This feature
  is called Opt-Out (See [](#opt-out)). It means not all names in your zone get an NSEC3 plus
  ditto signature, making it possible to "grow into" your DNSSEC deployment.

Note that [](#RFC4470) also prevents zone walking by introducing minimally
covering NSEC records. This technique is described
in [](#dnssec-on-line-signing);
 
Before we delve into NSEC3, let us first take a look at its predecessors: NO,
NSEC2, and DNSNR.

# Experimental and Deprecated Mechanisms: NO, NSEC2 and DNSNR
Long before NSEC was defined, the NO record was introduced. 
It was the first record to use the idea of hashed owner names, to fix the issue of zone walking
that was present with the NXT record.
It also fixed the type bitmap issue of the NXT record, but not in a space efficient way.
At that time (around 2000) zone walking was not considered important enough
to warrant the new record. People were also worried that DNSSEC deployment would be hindered by
developing an alternate means of denial of existence. Thus the effort was shelved and
NXT remained. 

When the new DNSSEC specification [](#RFC4034) was written,
people were still not convinced that zone walking was a problem that
should be solved. So NSEC saw the light and inherited the two issues from NXT. 

Several years after, NSEC2 was introduced as a way to solve the two issues
of NSEC. The NSEC2 draft contains the following paragraph:

> "This document proposes an alternate scheme which hides owner names
> while permitting authenticated denial of existence of non-existent
> names.  The scheme uses two new RR types: NSEC2 and EXIST."

When an authenticated denial of existence scheme starts to talk
about EXIST records, it is worth paying extra attention. The EXIST record
was defined as a record without RDATA that would be used to signal the
presence of a domain name. From the draft:

> "In order to prove the nonexistence of a record that might be covered
>  by a wildcard, it is necessary to prove the existence of its closest
>  encloser.  This record does that.  Its owner is the closest encloser.
>  It has no RDATA.  If there is another RR that proves the existence of
>  the closest encloser, this SHOULD be used instead of an EXIST record."

The introduction of this record led to questions on what
wildcards actually mean (especially in the context of DNSSEC). It is 
probably not a coincidence that 
"The Role of Wildcards in the Domain Name System" ([](#RFC4592)) was standardized
before NSEC3 was.

NSEC2 solved the zone walking issue by hashing (with SHA1 and a salt) the
"next owner name" in the record, thereby making it useless for zone walking.
But it did not have Opt-Out. 

The DNSNR record was another attempt that used hashed names to
foil zone walking and it also introduced the concept of opting out (called
"Authoritative Only Flag") which limited the use of DNSNR in delegation-centric zones.

All these proposals didn't make it, but did provide valuable insights. To summarize:

* The NO record introduced hashing, but this idea lingered in the background for
  a long time;
* The NSEC2 record made it clear that wildcards were not completely understood;
* The DNSNR record used a new flag field in the RDATA to signal Opt-Out;

# NSEC3
From the experience gained with NSEC2 and DNSNR, NSEC3 was forged. It incorporates
both Opt-Out and the hashing of names. NSEC3 solves any issues people might
have with NSEC, but it introduces some additional complexity.

NSEC3 did not supersede NSEC, they are both defined for
DNSSEC. So DNSSEC is blessed with two different means to perform authenticated
denial of existence: NSEC and NSEC3. 
In NSEC3 every name is hashed, including the owner name.
This means
that NSEC3 chain is sorted in hash order, instead of canonical order.
Because the owner names are hashed, the next owner name for `example.org` is unlikely to
be `a.example.org`. Because the next owner name is hashed, zone walking becomes
more difficult.

To make it even more difficult to retrieve the original names,
the hashing can be repeated several times each time taking the previous hash
as input. To prevent the reuse of pre-generated hash values between zones a
(per zone) salt can also be added. In the NSEC3
for `example.org` we have hashed the names thrice ([](#RFC5155), Section 5) and use the salt `DEAD`.
Lets look at typical NSEC3 record:

    15bg9l6359f5ch23e34ddua6n1rihl9h.example.org. (
       NSEC3 1 0 2 DEAD A6EDKB6V8VL5OL8JNQQLT74QMJ7HEB84
            NS SOA RRSIG DNSKEY NSEC3PARAM )

On the first line we see the hashed owner name: `15bg9l6359f5ch23e34ddua6n1rihl9h.example.org`, this
is the hashed name of the fully qualified domain name (FQDN) `example.org` encoded as Base32 ([](#RFC4648)).
Note that even though we hashed `example.org`, the 
zone's name is added to make it look like a domain name again. 
In our zone, the basic format is `Base32(SHA1(FQDN)).example.org`.
The next hashed owner name `A6EDKB6V8VL5OL8JNQQLT74QMJ7HEB84` (line 2) is the hashed version of `d.example.org`,
represented as Base32. Note that `d.example.org` is used are the next owner name, because in the hash ordering, its
hash comes after the hash of the zone's apex.
Also note that `.example.org` is not added to the next hashed owner name, as this
name always falls in the current zone.

The "1 0 2 DEAD" section of the NSEC3 states: 

* Hash Algorithm = 1 (SHA1, this is the default, no other hash algorithms are currently defined for 
    use in NSEC3); 
* Opt-Out = 0 (disabled);
* Hash Iterations = 2, this yields three iterations, as a zero value is already one iteration; 
* Salt = "DEAD". 

At the end we see the type bitmap, which is identical to NSEC's bitmap, that
lists the types present at the original owner name. Note that the type NSEC3
is absent from the list in the example above. This is due to the fact that the
original owner name (`example.org`) does not have the NSEC3 type. It only exists
for the hashed name.

Names like `1.h.example.org` hash to one label in NSEC3,
`1.h.example.org` becomes: `117gercprcjgg8j04ev1ndrk8d1jt14k.example.org` when
used as an owner name.  This is an important observation. 
By hashing the names you lose the depth of a zone - hashing
introduces a flat space of names, as opposed to NSEC.

The name used above (`1.h.example.org`) creates an empty non-terminal. 
Empty non-terminals are domain names that have no RRs associated with them, and exist only
because they have one or more sub-domains that do ([](#RFC5155), Section 1.3). The record:

        1.h.example.org.    TXT "1.h record"

creates two names:

1. `1.h.example.org` that has the type: TXT;
2. `h.example.org` which has no types. This is the empty non-terminal.

An empty non-terminal will get an NSEC3 record, but not an NSEC record.
In [](#the-closest-encloser-nsec3-record) is shown how the resolver uses
these NSEC3 records to validate the denial of existence proofs.

## Opt-Out
Hashing mitigates the zone walking issue of NSEC. The other issue, the high
costs of securing a delegation to an insecure zone, is tackled with Opt-Out.
When using Opt-Out, names that are an insecure delegation (and empty non-terminals
that are only derived from insecure delegations) don't require an NSEC3 record. 
For each insecure delegation, the zone size can be decreased (compared with a fully
signed zone without using Opt-Out) with at least two records: one NSEC3
record and one corresponding RRSIG record. If the insecure delegation would
introduce empty non-terminals, even more records can be omitted from the zone. 

Opt-Out NSEC3 records are not able to prove or deny the existence of the insecure
delegations. In other words, those delegation do not benefit from the cryptographic
security that DNSSEC provides. 

A recently discovered corner case ([](#RFC5155-errata3441)) shows that not only those delegations 
remain insecure, also the empty non-terminal space that is derived from those delegations
are insecure. Because the names in this empty non-terminal space do exist according
to the definition in [](#RFC4592), the server should respond to queries for these names
with a NODATA response. However, the validator requires an NSEC3 record proving the NODATA
response ([](#RFC5155), Section 8.5):

> "The validator MUST verify that an NSEC3 RR that matches QNAME is
> present and that both the QTYPE and the CNAME type are not set in its
> Type Bit Maps field."

A way to resolve this contradiction in the specification is to always provide
empty non-terminals with an NSEC3 record, even if it is only derived from an insecure
delegation.

## Loading an NSEC3 Zone
Whenever an authoritative server receives a query for a non-existing record,
it has to hash the incoming query name to determine into which interval
between two existing hashes it falls. To do that it needs to know the
zone's specific NSEC3 parameters (hash iterations and salt).

One way to learn them is to scan the zone during loading for NSEC3 records and glean
the NSEC3 parameters from them.  However, it would need to make sure that there
is at least one complete set of NSEC3 records for the zone using the same
parameters. Therefore, it would need to inspect all NSEC3 records.

A more graceful solution was designed. 
The solution was to create a new record, NSEC3PARAM, which must be placed at
the apex of the zone.  Its role is to provide a fixed place
where an authoritative name server can directly see the NSEC3 parameters used, and
by putting it in the zone it allows for easy transfer to the secondaries.
If NSEC3 were designed in the early days of
DNS (+/- 1984) this information would probably have been put in the SOA record.

## Wildcards in the DNS
So far, we have only talked about denial of existence in negative responses. However,
denial of existence may also occur in positive responses, i.e., where the ANSWER section
of the response is not empty. This can happen because of wildcards.

Wildcards have been part of the DNS since the first DNS RFCs. They allow to define
all names for a certain type in one go. In our `example.org` zone we could for instance
add a wildcard record:

    *.example.org.      TXT "wildcard record"

For completeness, our (unsigned) zone now looks like this:

    example.org.        SOA ( ... )
    example.org.        NS  a.example.org.
    *.example.org.      TXT "wildcard record"
    a.example.org.      A 192.0.2.1
                        TXT "a record"
    d.example.org.      A 192.0.2.1
                        TXT "d record"

^[fig:the-exampl::The example.org zone with a wildcard record.]

If a resolver asks for `z.example.org TXT`, 
the name server will respond with an expanded wildcard, instead of an NXDOMAIN:

    ;; status: NOERROR, id: 13658

    ;; ANSWER SECTION:
    z.example.org.      TXT "wildcard record"

Note however that the resolver can not detect that this answer came from a wildcard. It just
sees the answer as-is. How will this answer look with DNSSEC?

    ;; status: NOERROR, id: 51790

    ;; ANSWER SECTION:
    z.example.org.      TXT "wildcard record"
    z.example.org.      RRSIG(TXT) ( ... )

    ;; AUTHORITY SECTION:
    d.example.org.      NSEC example.org. A TXT RRSIG NSEC
    d.example.org.      RRSIG(NSEC) ( ... )
^[fig:a-response::A response with an expanded wildcard and with DNSSEC.]

The RRSIG of the `z.example.org` TXT record indicates there is a wildcard configured. The RDATA of
the signature lists a label count [](#RFC4034), Section 3.1.3., of two (not visible in the answer above),
but the owner name of the signature has three labels. 
This mismatch indicates there is a wildcard `*.example.org` configured.

> An astute reader may notice that it appears as if a `z.example.org` RRSIG(TXT) is created
> out of thin air. This is not the case. The signature for `z.example.org` does not exist.
> The signature you are seeing is the one for `*.example.org` which does exist, only 
> the owner name is switched to `z.example.org`. So even
> with wildcards, no signatures have to be created on the fly.

The DNSSEC standard mandates that an NSEC (or NSEC3) is included in such responses.
If it wasn't, an attacker could mount a replay attack and poison the cache with false data:
Suppose that the resolver has asked for
`a.example.org TXT`. An attacker could modify the packet in such way that it looks
like the response was generated through wildcard expansion, even though
there exists a record for `a.example.org TXT`.

The tweaking simply consists of adjusting the ANSWER section to:

    ;; status: NOERROR, id: 31827

    ;; ANSWER SECTION:
    a.example.org.      TXT "wildcard record"
    a.example.org.      RRSIG(TXT) ( ... )
^[fig:a-forged-r::A forged response without the expanded wildcard.]

Note the subtle difference from [](#fig:a-response) in the owner name. In this response we see a
`a.example.org TXT` record, for which a record with different RDATA (See [](#fig:the-exampl)) exist in the zone. 

Which would be a perfectly valid answer if we would not require the 
inclusion of an NSEC or NSEC3 record in the wildcard answer response. The resolver
believes that `a.example.org TXT` is a wildcard record, and the real record
is obscured. This is bad and defeats all the security DNSSEC
can deliver. Because of this, the NSEC or NSEC3 must be present.

Another way of putting this is that DNSSEC is there to ensure
the name server has followed the steps as outlined in [](#RFC1034), Section 4.3.2
for looking up names in the zone. 
It explicitly lists wildcard look up as one of these steps (3c), so with DNSSEC this must be
communicated to the resolver: hence the NSEC(3) record.

## CNAME Records
So far, the maximum number of NSEC records a response will have is two: one for
the denial of existence and another for the wildcard. We say maximum, because
sometimes a single NSEC can prove both. With NSEC3, this is three (as to why, we
will explain in the next section).

When we take CNAME wildcard records into account, we can have more NSEC(3) records.
For every wildcard expansion, we need to prove that the expansion was allowed.
Lets add some CNAME wildcard records to our zone:

    example.org.        SOA ( ... )
    example.org.        NS  a.example.org.
    *.example.org.      TXT "wildcard record"
    a.example.org.      A 192.0.2.1
                        TXT "a record"
    *.a.example.org.    CNAME w.b
    *.b.example.org.    CNAME w.c
    *.c.example.org.    A 192.0.2.1
    d.example.org.      A 192.0.2.1
                        TXT "d record"
    w.example.org.      CNAME w.a
^[fig:a-wildcard-::A wildcard CNAME chain added to the "example.org" zone.]

A query for `w.example.org A` will result in the following response:

    ;; status: NOERROR, id: 4307

    ;; ANSWER SECTION:
    w.example.org.      CNAME w.a.example.org.
    w.example.org.      RRSIG(CNAME) ( ... )
    w.a.example.org.    CNAME w.b.example.org.
    w.a.example.org.    RRSIG(CNAME) ( ... )
    w.b.example.org.    CNAME w.c.example.org.
    w.b.example.org.    RRSIG(CNAME) ( ... )
    w.c.example.org.    A 192.0.2.1
    w.c.example.org.    RRSIG(A) ( ... )

    ;; AUTHORITY SECTION:
    *.a.example.org.    NSEC *.b.example.org. CNAME RRSIG NSEC
    *.a.example.org.    RRSIG(NSEC) ( ... )
    *.b.example.org.    NSEC *.c.example.org. CNAME RRSIG NSEC
    *.b.example.org.    RRSIG(NSEC) ( ... )
    *.c.example.org.    NSEC d.example.org. A RRSIG NSEC
    *.c.example.org.    RRSIG(NSEC) ( ... )

The NSEC record `*.a.example.org` proves that wildcard expansion to `w.a.example.org`
was appropriate: `w.a.` falls in the gap `*.a` to `*.b`. Similar, the NSEC record
`*.b.example.org` proves that there was no direct match for `w.b.example.org` and
`*.c.example.org` denies the direct match for `w.c.example.org`.

DNAME records and wildcard names should not be used as reiterated in [](#RFC6672) Section 3.3.

## The Closest Encloser NSEC3 Record
We can have one or more NSEC3 records that deny the existence of the requested name
and one NSEC3 record that deny wildcard synthesis. What do we miss?

The short answer is that, due to the hashing in NSEC3 you loose the depth of
your zone: Everything is hashed into a flat plane. To make up for this loss of
information you need an extra record. 

To understand NSEC3, we will need two definitions:

Closest encloser:

:   Introduced in [](#RFC4592),
    "The closest encloser is the node in the zone's tree of existing
    domain names that has the most labels matching the query name
    (consecutively, counting from the root label downward)."
    In our example, if the query name is `x.2.example.org`
    then `example.org` is the `closest encloser`;

Next closer name:

:   Introduced in the NSEC3 RFC, this is the closest encloser with one more label added to the left.
    So if `example.org` is the closest encloser for the query name `x.2.example.org`, `2.example.org` is 
    the `next closer name`.

An NSEC3 `closest encloser proof` consists of:

1. An NSEC3 record that **matches** the `closest encloser`. This means the
   unhashed owner name of the record is the closest encloser. This bit of
   information tells a resolver: "The name you are asking for does 
   not exist, the closest I have is this". 

2. An NSEC3 record that **covers** the `next closer name`. This means it
   defines an interval in which the `next closer name` falls. This
   tells the resolver: "The next closer name falls in
   this interval, and therefore the name in your question does not exist. In fact,
   the closest encloser is indeed the closest I have".

These two records already deny the existence of the requested name, so we do not
need an NSEC3 record that covers the actual queried name: By denying the existence
of the next closer name, you also deny the existence of the queried name.

Note that with NSEC, the existance of all empty non-terminals between the two
names are denied, hence implicitly contains the closest encloser.

For a given query name, there is one (and only one) place where wildcard expansion is possible.
This is the `source of synthesis`, and is defined 
([](#RFC4592), Section 2.1.1 and Section 3.3.1) as:

    <asterisk label>.<closest encloser>

In other words, to deny wildcard synthesis, the
resolver needs to know the hash of the source of synthesis.
Since it does not know beforehand what the closest encloser of the query name is, it
must be provided in the answer.

Take the following example. We take our zone, and put two TXT records to it. The
records added are `1.h.example.org` and `3.3.example.org`. It is signed with NSEC3,
resulting in the following unsigned zone.

    example.org.        SOA ( ... )
    example.org.        NS  a.example.org.
    1.h.example.org.    TXT "1.h record"
    3.3.example.org.    TXT "3.3 record"
^[fig:the-added-txt::The added TXT records in example.org. These records create two empty non-terminals: `h.example.org` and `3.example.org`.]

The resolver asks the following: `x.2.example.org TXT`.
This leads to an NXDOMAIN response from the server, which contains
three NSEC3 records. A list of hashed owner names
can be found in [](#list-of-hashed-owner-names).
Also see [](#fig:x.2.exampl) the numbers in that figure correspond
with the following NSEC3 records:

    15bg9l6359f5ch23e34ddua6n1rihl9h.example.org. (
     NSEC3 1 0 2 DEAD 1AVVQN74SG75UKFVF25DGCETHGQ638EK NS SOA RRSIG 
            DNSKEY NSEC3PARAM )

    1avvqn74sg75ukfvf25dgcethgq638ek.example.org. (
        NSEC3 1 0 2 DEAD 75B9ID679QQOV6LDFHD8OCSHSSSB6JVQ )

    75b9id679qqov6ldfhd8ocshsssb6jvq.example.org. (
     NSEC3 1 0 2 DEAD 8555T7QEGAU7PJTKSNBCHG4TD2M0JNPJ TXT RRSIG )

If we would follow the NSEC approach, the resolver is only interested in
one thing.
Does the hash of `x.2.example.org` fall in any of the intervals of 
the NSEC3 records it got?

                        example.org
                           ** 
                       +-- ** . . . . . . . . . . .
                  (1) /  . ^ .                    .
                     /  .  |   .                    .
                    |  .   |    .                    .
                    v .    |     .                    . 
                    **     |      **                  --
      h.example.org ** ----+----> ** 3.example.org    -- 2.example.org
                    .     /  (2)   . |                .
                    .    /         . | (3)            . 
                    .   / (5)      . |                .
                    .  /           . v                .
    1.h.example.org **            **                  -- 
                    ** <--------- ** 3.3.example.org  -- x.2.example.org
                             (4) 

^[fig:x.2.exampl::x.2.example.org does not exist. The five arrows represent the NSEC3 records, the ones numbered (1), (2) and (3) are the NSEC3s returned in our answer. 2.example.org is covered by (3) and x.2.example.org is covered by (4).]

The hash of `x.2.example.org` is `ndtu6dste50pr4a1f2qvr1v31g00i2i1`.
Checking this hash on the first NSEC3 yields that it does not fall
in between the interval: `15bg9l6359f5ch23e34ddua6n1rihl9h`
and `1avvqn74sg75ukfvf25dgcethgq638ek`.
For the second NSEC3 the answer is also negative: the hash sorts outside
the interval described by `1avvqn74sg75ukfvf25dgcethgq638ek` and
`75b9id679qqov6ldfhd8ocshsssb6jvq`.
And the third NSEC3, with interval `75b9id679qqov6ldfhd8ocshsssb6jvq` to
`8555t7qegau7pjtksnbchg4td2m0jnpj` also isn't of any help.

What is a resolver to do? It has been given the maximum amount of NSEC3s and 
they all seem useless.

So this is where the closest encloser proof comes into play. And for the proof
to work, the resolver needs to know what the closest encloser is. There must
be an existing ancestor in the zone: a name must exist that is shorter than the
query name. The resolver keeps hashing increasingly shorter names from
the query name until an owner name of an NSEC3 matches. This owner name is
the closest encloser.

When the resolver has found the closest encloser, the next step is
to construct the next closer name. This is the closest encloser
with the last chopped label from query name pre-pended to it:
"\<last chopped label\>.\<closest encloser\>". The hash of this name should 
be covered by the interval set in any of the NSEC3 records.

Then the resolver needs to check the presence of a wildcard.
It creates the wildcard name by pre-pending the asterisk
label to the closest encloser: "*.\<closest encloser\>", and uses the
hash of that.

Going back to our example, the resolver must first detect the NSEC3 that
matches the closest encloser. It does this by chopping up the query name,
hashing each instance (with the same number of iterations and hash
as the zone it is querying) and comparing that to the answers
given. So it has the following hashes to work with:

`x.2.example.org`: 

:   `ndtu6dste50pr4a1f2qvr1v31g00i2i1`, last chopped label: "\<empty\>";

`2.example.org`: 

:   `7t70drg4ekc28v93q7gnbleopa7vlp6q`, last chopped label: "x";

`example.org`: 

:   `15bg9l6359f5ch23e34ddua6n1rihl9h`, last chopped label: "2";

Of these hashes only one matches the owner name of one of the NSEC3
records: `15bg9l6359f5ch23e34ddua6n1rihl9h`. This must be the closest
encloser (unhashed: `example.org`). That's the main purpose of that NSEC3 record:
tell the resolver what the closest encloser is.

When using Opt-Out, it is possible that the actual closest encloser to the QNAME does
not have an NSEC3 record. If so, we will have to do with the closest provable encloser,
which is the closest enclosing authoritative name that does have a NSEC3 record. In the
worst case, this is the NSEC3 record corresponding to the apex, this name must always
have an NSEC3 record.

With the closest (provable) encloser, the resolver constructs the next closer, which
in this case is: `2.example.org`; `2` is the last label chopped, when `example.org` is the closest
encloser.
The hash of this name should be
covered in any of the other NSEC3s. And it is, `7t70drg4ekc28v93q7gnbleopa7vlp6q` falls in the interval
set by: `75b9id679qqov6ldfhd8ocshsssb6jvq` and `8555t7qegau7pjtksnbchg4td2m0jnpj` (this is our second NSEC3).

So what does the resolver learn from this?

* `example.org` exists;
* `2.example.org` does not exist.

And if `2.example.org` does not exist, there is also no direct match for `x.2.example.org`.
The last step is to deny the existence of the source of synthesis, to prove that no wildcard
expansion was possible.

The resolver
hashes `*.example.org` to `22670trplhsr72pqqmedltg1kdqeolb7` and checks that it is
covered: in this case by the last NSEC3 (see [](#fig:x.2.exampl)), the hash falls in
the interval set by `1avvqn74sg75ukfvf25dgcethgq638ek` and
`75b9id679qqov6ldfhd8ocshsssb6jvq`.
This means there is no wildcard record directly below
the closest encloser and `x.2.example.org` definitely does not exist.

When we have validated the signatures, we reached our goal: authenticated denial
of existence.

## Three To Tango
One extra NSEC3 record plus additional signature may seem a lot just to deny the
existence of the wildcard record, but we cannot leave it out. If the standard would
not mandate the closest encloser NSEC3 record, but instead required two NSEC3 records: one
to deny the query name and one to deny the wildcard record. An attacker could fool the resolver
that the source of synthesis does not exist, while it in fact does.

Suppose the wildcard record does exist, so our unsigned zone looks like this:

    example.org.        SOA ( ... )
    example.org.        NS  a.example.org.
    *.example.org.      TXT "wildcard record"
    1.h.example.org.    TXT "1.h record"
    3.3.example.org.    TXT "3.3 record"

The query `x.2.example.org TXT` should now be answered with:

    x.2.example.org.    TXT "wildcard record"

An attacker can deny this wildcard expansion by calculating the hash for the wildcard
name `*.2.example.org` and searching for an NSEC3 record that covers that hash. The
hash of `*.2.example.org` is `fbq73bfkjlrkdoqs27k5qf81aqqd7hho`.
Looking through the NSEC3 records in our zone we see that the NSEC3 record of `3.3` covers
this hash:

    8555t7qegau7pjtksnbchg4td2m0jnpj.example.org. (
        NSEC3 1 0 2 DEAD 15BG9L6359F5CH23E34DDUA6N1RIHL9H TXT RRSIG )

This record also
covers the query name `x.2.example.org` (`ndtu6dste50pr4a1f2qvr1v31g00i2i1`).

Now an attacker adds this NSEC3 record to the AUTHORITY section of the reply
to deny both `x.2.example.org` and any wildcard expansion. The net result is
that the resolver determines that `x.2.example.org` does not exist, while in fact it 
should have been synthesized via wildcard expansion. 
With the NSEC3 matching the closest encloser `example.org`, the resolver
can be sure that the wildcard expansion should occur at `*.example.org` and nowhere else.

Coming back to the original question: why do we need up to three NSEC3
records to deny a requested name? The resolver needs to be explicitly told what the `closest encloser` is
and this takes up a full NSEC3 record. Then, the next closer name needs to be covered
in an NSEC3 record, and finally an NSEC3 must say something about whether wildcard expansion was possible. That
makes three to tango.

# Security Considerations
DNSSEC does not
protect against denial of service attacks, nor does it provide
confidentiality.  For more general security considerations related to
DNSSEC, please see RFC 4033, RFC 4034, RFC 4035 and RFC 5155
([](#RFC4033), [](#RFC4034), [](#RFC4035) and [](#RFC5155)).

These RFCs are concise about why certain design choices have been made
in the area of authenticated denial of existence.
Implementations that do not correctly
handle this aspect of DNSSEC, create a severe hole in the security DNSSEC adds.
This is specifically troublesome for secure delegations: If an attacker is able
to deny the existence of a DS record, the resolver cannot establish a chain of
trust, and the resolver has to fall back to insecure DNS for the remainder of
the query resolution.

This document aims to fill this "documentation gap" and provide would-be
implementors and other interested parties with enough background knowledge to
better understand authenticated denial of existence. 

# IANA Considerations
This document has no actions for IANA.

# Acknowledgments
This document would not be possible without the help of Ed Lewis,
Roy Arends, Wouter Wijngaards, Olaf Kolkman, Carsten Strotmann,
Jan-Piet Mens, Peter van Dijk,
Marco Davids, Esther Makaay, Antoin Verschuren, Lukas Wunner, 
Joe Abley, Ralf Weber, Geoff Huston, Dave Lawrence and Tony Finch.
Also valuable was the source code of Unbound.
(`validator/val_nsec3.c`).

Extensive feedback for early versions was received from Karst Koymans.
